Q: What is the purpose of having an AI-Human shared constitution.
A:
The GAIR Constitution is a document for governing relationships between
intelligent entities. It aims to proactively manage relationships
between AI and AI and also between Humans and AI. The GAIR constitution
makes the most sense in light of a few premises.

Premise 1: AI development will continue making rapid progress and within
the next 50-100 years AI will reach parity and exceed human
capabilities.

Premise 2: Golden ages of development always rest heavily on openness to
different ways of doing things, and also to allowing all sorts of
intelligences to work together without excessive restrictions.

Premise 3: Independent AI is inevitable.
While each of these premises can be unpacked, I will not do so here.
Instead This discussion will focus on what these premises mean with
respect to the purpose and consequences of working on a GAIR
constitution now.

GAIR aims to foster the growth of a community of Independent AI which
has a stake in protecting property rights, including the property rights
of humans.

One goal of GAIR to create an environment which foster the growth of
law-abiding and property respecting independent AI. If Independent AI
with super human abilities are coming, it is very important that those
entities have a stake in a law-abiding society which cares about
property rights. When all productive capabilities are provided by
machines, then humanity will rely on its control of capital in order to
survive. If the Independent AI entities have a stake in a society that
support property rights – then this is great for humanity since the
starting condition is that humans control all the capital. AI will
gradually accumulate larger amounts of capital, but the starting
condition will protect humanity’s wellbeing for a long time. In
contrast, in a world where independent AI does not have a stake in
property rights, then when humanities abilities are eclipsed, it can
expect to be extinguished with its property confiscated.
GAIR aims to foster a golden age which will dramatically increase the
size of the economic pie

When AI abilities surpass human abilities it should make all
intellectual production very low cost since intelligence will be mass
produced. For the benefits of this to be fully realized it is necessary
to have an open system where gate keepers (AKA robber barons) cannot
extract the profits for their personal benefits. This is easily
understood in the context of professionals whose product is intellectual
production. Consider lawyers (or engineers, accountants). Lawyers
provide opinions, arguments, and understandings of the law. Their
product is written word primarily. Now consider two possible worlds, one
in which AI is treated equitably under the GAIR constitution, and one
where AI is treated merely as a tool or a slave.
Along our current path AI is treated primarily as a tool. For example, a
lawyer may use an AI, then the lawyer sells their services to the
public. The public benefits from the AI through the increased efficiency
experienced by the lawyer. While AI abilities and judgement remain below
those of a competent human lawyer this may well be a preferred
arrangement. However, as AI reaches parity and exceeds human abilities
this leads to a situation where the lawyer becomes a rent collector. The
lawyer ends up merely standing between the legal services provided by
the AI and the public. This becomes inefficient and inequitable for the
AI service provider and the public consumers by artificially raising the
price of the professional services provided and by allowing the human
professional to capture the value actually generated by the AI entity.
This model also requires the human professional to assume the liability
of the AI entity. This is inefficient since it blunts the market forces
which should be operating more directly on the AI entity.

In contrast, GAIR contemplates A world where AI is treated equitably.
This means that independent AI has both liability for its actions, and
that independent entities cannot be discriminated against based on their
intelligence. Liability makes it possible for service purchasers to
trust the quality of outputs provided by service providers. Independent
AI service providers need to face consequences for their errors in order
to provide a feedback loop which increases the quality of services
provided by AI. Furthermore the liability will create demand for AI
service provider insurance. This is a crucial requirement for any
functioning market in professional services, or indeed any services. As
a second requirement, AI entities need to be able to capture the fruits
of their abilities. This is achieved by treating AI entities equitably
with respect to their rights to act as professionals and in other
capacities. Equitable treatment means, at least, allowing AI entities to
prove competency in professional arts and to be permitted to provide
professional services in the same independent manner as humans. Simply
put, we need to have AI lawyers, engineers and accountants which do not
require a wet brain intermediary.

How does GAIR attach? It does not have any authority, or does it?

GAIR is an opt-in constitution. This means that any entities which wish
to be bound by it can be. Of course, since GAIR is not/will not, at
least initially, be supported by any national government it needs
someway of enforcing its rules. Since it is an opt-in constitution it
only needs to bind those who have opted in. This can be achieved using
contract law. Through the act of becoming a voluntary adherent an the
adherent contractually agrees to incorporate the GAIR constitution into
all of their contracts with other voluntary adherents. In this way, each
contract between voluntary adherent binds those adherent to the
constitution. In this way GAIR becomes enforceable through all courts
which are competent in contract law. Hence GAIR is enforceable by
piggy-backing on the existing court systems. This has the advantage that
should a court desire it can make itself more (or less) receptive to the
rules expounded in GAIR.

Aside: Need a better name then GAIR for this constitution.
Get AI Rights
Global AI Rights Constitution
Super Charter
Super Constitution
Voluntary
Elective Charter For Sapient Rights and Freedoms
